KOGITO-7299: Displaying workflow runtime data in serverless dashboards (#52)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/integrations/serverless-dashboard-with-runtime-data.adoc

> = Displaying workflow runtime data in serverless dashboards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Displaying workflow runtime data in Serverless Dashboards
```

This document describes steps to create serverless dashboards to monitor Kogito Serverless Workflows. 

To build dashboards we need data and it can be easily acquired from Kogito Serverless Workflow using any of the following approaches:

* Enabling **Metrics**
* Integrating with **Data Index** to consume data using its REST API
* Using custom mechanisms (such as `ProcessInstanceListener`)

> In this document we will explore creating serverless dashboards for metrics and for Data Index GraphQL REST API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this document, we will explore creating serverless dashboards for metrics and for Data Index GraphQL REST API.
```

== Serverless Dashboards with Dashbuilder

> Serverless Dashboards are visualizations that run entirely on the client side. We will use https://www.dashbuilder.org[Dashbuilder] to create serverless dashboards: it consumes data from any JSON source and the dashboard is defined in YML format.

Reviewer 2: Can you add this link to a variable at the beginning of the doc?

> Serverless Dashboards are visualizations that run entirely on the client side. We will use https://www.dashbuilder.org[Dashbuilder] to create serverless dashboards: it consumes data from any JSON source and the dashboard is defined in YML format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Serverless Dashboards are visualizations that run entirely on the client-side. We will use https://www.dashbuilder.org[Dashbuilder] to create Serverless Dashboards. It consumes data from any JSON source and the dashboard is defined in YML format.
```

> To use Dashbuilder you just have to uncompress the `dashbuilder-client` NPM package and edit the file *setup.js* to link your YML files.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate a bit more? So it's just unzip, modify the js and run npm install? Do we have a doc in the dashbuilder website that teaches how to build an image for it? Maybe it would be good to link it here, so that users can push to a cluster with the application.

One question, though: what's the recommendation? Have one dashbuilder per application or one to rule them all? 😆

Author: I am adding a link  to the dashbuilder docs for now - I hope to later edit this part to include a link to our official online client. For now the dashbuilder client installation is the only official way to run YML files!

About the number of dashboards, you can use as many as you want :-D it should not impact performance - the only difference is the home page, which will have a list of dashboards.

image::getting-started/integrations/dashbuilder-sample-report.png[]

== Using Metrics for building Dashboards

> For adding metrics to your serverless workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.

Reviewer 2: Please add an excerpt of the pom.xml file exemplifying how to do it.

> For adding metrics to your serverless workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For adding metrics to your Serverless Workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.
```

> Dashbuilder can consume data directly from metrics endpoints. Using an expression to format some metrics we can simply show metrics in a table using the following YML:

Author: I added a link to the JSONAta website - please let me know if it is helpful or I can go ahead and elaborate more

.Show metrics in a table
[source,yml]
----
datasets:
  - uuid: swf_metrics
    url: http://localhost:8080/q/metrics
    expression: >-
        $map($, function($l) { 
                [
                    $l[0], 
                    $contains($l[1], "process_id") ? 
                                            $replace($match($l[1], /process_id=".*?"/).match, 
                                            "process_id", 
                                            "workflow") : 
                                            $l[1], 
                    $l[2] = "NaN" ? -1 : $l[2]
                ]
            }
        )
pages:
    - components:
        - settings:            
            lookup:
               uuid: swf_metrics
----

.Metrics in a table

> image::getting-started/integrations/dashbuilder-metrics-table.png[]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
image::integrations/dashbuilder-metrics-table.png[]
```

> To extract serverless workflow specific information you can use specific Kogito metrics and when displaying the metric we filter the data to only include these metrics. Metrics related to Serverless Workflow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To extract serverless workflow-specific information, you can use specific Kogito metrics, and when displaying the metric, we filter the data to only include these metrics. Metrics related to Serverless Workflow:
```

                    group:
                      - columnGroup:
                          source: labels
                        groupFunctions:
                          - source: labels
                          - source: value
          - span: "6"
            components:
              - html: >-
                  <p style="font-size: large">Total Duration </p>
              - settings:
                  type: BARCHART                  
                  chart:
                    resizable: 'true'
                    width: '2000'
                  lookup:
                    uuid: metrics
                    sort:
                      - column: value
                        sortOrder: DESCENDING
                    filter:
                      - column: metric
                        function: EQUALS_TO
                        args:
                          - "kogito_process_instance_duration_seconds_sum"
                    group:
                      - columnGroup:
                          source: labels
                        groupFunctions:
                          - source: labels
                          - source: value
----

.Workflow Metrics Dashboard

> image::getting-started/integrations/dashbuilder-workflows-metrics-dashboard.png[]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
image::integrations/dashbuilder-workflows-metrics-dashboard.png[]
```

> If you are using Prometheus we can use PROMQL with Prometheus REST API and transform the result to the JSON format supported by Dashbuilder to build dashboards. For further information about Dashbuilder and Prometheus check the article https://blog.kie.org/2022/07/creating-prometheus-dashboards-using-dashbuilder.html[Creating Prometheus Dashboards with Dashbuilder].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using Prometheus, we can use PROMQL with Prometheus REST API and transform the result to the JSON format supported by Dashbuilder to build dashboards. For further information about Dashbuilder and Prometheus check the article https://blog.kie.org/2022/07/creating-prometheus-dashboards-using-dashbuilder.html[Creating Prometheus Dashboards with Dashbuilder].
```

== Using Data Index

> Data index is a service available during development mode and it contains all data about the workflow steps execution. By default data index is available at `http://localhost:8180` and it uses GraphQL, so Dashbuilder can connect to it using its REST API and transform the result to the supported format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data index is a service available during development mode, containing all data about the execution of workflow steps. By default, the data index is available at http://localhost:8180, and it uses GraphQL, so Dashbuilder can connect to it using its REST API and transform the result to the supported format.
```

You can leave the link since the user might be reading this while working. It will make it easier for them to just click on it.

> The steps to create a dashboard with data from Data Index:

Reviewer: Great docs! @jesuino , just some minor suggestions from my side :)

here may be convert it to a heading like :  `.The steps to create a dashboard with data from Data Index:`

> 1) Go to Data Index GraphQL interface (default is `http://localhost:8180/graphiql`) and test your query. Let's use as example this query that list all workflows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1) Go to the Data Index GraphQL interface (default is http://localhost:8180/graphiql) and test your query. Let's use as an example this query that lists all workflows:
```

> 1) Go to Data Index GraphQL interface (default is `http://localhost:8180/graphiql`) and test your query. Let's use as example this query that list all workflows:

Reviewer: we can make use of antora's ordered lists here -> https://docs.antora.org/antora/latest/asciidoc/ordered-and-unordered-lists/#ordered. so here we can `. Go to the Data Index GraphQL interface (default is http://localhost:8180/graphiql) and test your query. Let's use as an example this query that lists all workflows:` instead of `1)`

> 1) Go to Data Index GraphQL interface (default is `http://localhost:8180/graphiql`) and test your query. Let's use as example this query that list all workflows:

Reviewer: . Go to Data Index GraphQL interface (default is `http://localhost:8180/graphiql`) and test your query. Let's use as example this query that list all workflows:
```suggestion
1) Go to Data Index GraphQL interface (default is `http://localhost:8180/graphiql`) and test your query. Let's use as example this query that list all workflows:
```

> 

Reviewer: please add a `+` to do a list continuation

.Example GraphQL query to retrieve all workflows
[source,json]
----
{
  ProcessInstances {
    processId
    processName
    state
    start
    end
    businessKey
    error {message}
  }
}
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--
```

> 2) Notice that when you run the query it modifies the URL to include the query. Copy the URL, but modify `graphiql` to `graphql`. When accessing it you will notice that it returns the result in a JSON format, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Notice that when you run the query it modifies the URL to include the query. Copy the URL, but modify `graphiql` to `graphql`. When accessing it you will notice that it returns the result in a JSON format, such as:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

.GraphQL JSON result when using the query above
[source,json]
----
{
  "data": {
    "ProcessInstances": [
      {
        "processId": "yamlgreet",
        "processName": "Greeting workflow",
        "state": "COMPLETED",
        "start": "2022-07-01T16:08:12.038Z",
        "end": "2022-07-01T16:08:12.061Z",
        "businessKey": null,
        "error": null
      },
    ]
  }
}
----
[NOTE]
====

> Internally Workflows are referenced as process hence the fields `processId` and `processName` are actually the workflow id and name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internally, Workflows are referenced as process hence the fields `processId` and `processName` are actually the workflow id and name.
```

====

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--
```

> 3) Now it is required to transform the response, so a transform expression is used. Notice also that it includes the columns metadata for the dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Now it is required to transform the response, so a transform expression is used. Notice also that it includes the columns metadata for the dataset
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

.Transform expression to get the fields from the JSON response
[source,json]
----
{
    "columns" :[
        {"id": "Workflow Id", "type": "label"},
        {"id": "Workflow Name", "type": "label"},
        {"id": "State", "type": "label"},
        {"id": "Start", "type": "label"},
        {"id": "End", "type": "label"},
        {"id": "Business Key", "type": "label"},
        {"id": "Error", "type": "label"}
    ],    
    "values" : $.data.ProcessInstances.[ processId, processName, state, start, end, businessKey ? businessKey : "", error ? error.message : ""]
}
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--
```

> 4) Finally we can create our dashboard using the expression and the URL mentioned previously. Our dashboard has a bar chart that counts the process instances by State and list all dashboards in a table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Finally we can create our dashboard using the expression and the URL mentioned previously. Our dashboard has a bar chart that counts the process instances by State and list all dashboards in a table:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

                    {"id": "Workflow Name", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "State", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "Start", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "End", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "Business Key", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "Error", "type": "label"}
                ],    
                "values" : $.data.ProcessInstances.[ processId, processName, state, start, end, businessKey ? businessKey : "", error ? error.message : ""]
            }      
pages:
    - components:
        - settings:
            type: BARCHART
            lookup:
                uuid: workflows
                group:
                    - columnGroup: 
                        source: State
                      functions:
                          - source: State
                          - source: State
                            function: COUNT
        - settings:
            lookup:
                uuid: workflows
----

The YML above results in the following dashboard:

.Dashboard with data from Data Index
image::getting-started/integrations/data-index-workflow-list-report.png[]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--
```

> = Displaying workflow runtime data in Serverless Dashboards

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Displaying workflow runtime data in Serverless Dashboards
=============================================
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Displaying workflow runtime data in Serverless Dashboards
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, ??
```

:dashbuilder_url: https://www.dashbuilder.org

> This document describes steps to create Serverless Dashboards to monitor Kogito Serverless Workflows. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document describes steps to create Dashboards to monitor Kogito Serverless Workflows. 
```

To build dashboards we need data and it can be easily acquired from Kogito Serverless Workflow using any of the following approaches:

* Enabling **Metrics**
* Integrating with **Data Index** to consume data using its REST API
* Using custom mechanisms (such as `ProcessInstanceListener`)

In this document we will explore creating serverless dashboards for metrics and for Data Index GraphQL REST API.

== Serverless Dashboards with Dashbuilder

> Serverless Dashboards are visualizations that run entirely on the client side. We will use link:{dashbuilder_url}[Dashbuilder] to create Serverless Dashboards: it consumes data from any JSON source and the dashboard is defined in YML format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Serverless Dashboards are visualizations that run entirely on the client side. We will use link:{dashbuilder_url}[Dashbuilder] to create Dashboards: it consumes data from any JSON source and the dashboard is defined in YAML format.
```

> To use Dashbuilder you just have to uncompress the `dashbuilder-client` NPM package and edit the file *setup.js* to link your YML files. For further information please check link:https://www.dashbuilder.org/docs/#_client_only[Dashbuilder documentation].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use Dashbuilder you need to download, uncompress the `dashbuilder-client` NPM package and edit the file *setup.js* to link your YAML files. For further information please check link:https://www.dashbuilder.org/docs/#_client_only[Dashbuilder documentation].
```

image::integrations/dashbuilder-sample-report.png[]

== Using Metrics for building Dashboards

> For adding metrics to your Serverless Workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable metrics for your Serverless Workflow application add the `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` dependency to your app's classpath and the metrics will be available at `/q/metrics` path.
```

> .Dependency to be added to `pom.xml` to enable metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Metrics Dependency to be added to `pom.xml`
```

[source,xml]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
      <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>
    </dependency>
----

Dashbuilder can consume data directly from metrics endpoints. Using a link:https://docs.jsonata.org/overview.html[JSONAta expression] to format some metrics we can simply show metrics in a table using the following YML:

.Show metrics in a table

> [source,yml]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
```

                                            "process_id", 
                                            "workflow") : 
                                            $l[1], 
                    $l[2] = "NaN" ? -1 : $l[2]
                ]
            }
        )
pages:
    - components:
        - settings:            
            lookup:
               uuid: swf_metrics
----

.Metrics in a table
image::integrations/dashbuilder-metrics-table.png[]

To extract Serverless Workflow-specific information, you can use specific Kogito metrics, and when displaying the metric we filter the data to only include these metrics. Metrics related to Serverless Workflow:

* *kogito_process_instance_completed_total*: Completed Workflows
* *kogito_process_instance_started_total*: Started Workflows
* *kogito_process_instance_running_total*: Running Workflows
* *kogito_process_instance_duration_seconds_sum*: Workflows Total Duration 

Dashbuilder *metrics* and *bar chart* components are useful to display these metrics. After filtering specific metrics we can put the information in bar charts as you can see the YML below:

> [source,yml]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
```

                          source: labels
                        groupFunctions:
                          - source: labels
                          - source: value
          - span: "6"
            components:
              - html: >-
                  <p style="font-size: large">Total Duration </p>
              - settings:
                  type: BARCHART                  
                  chart:
                    resizable: 'true'
                    width: '2000'
                  lookup:
                    uuid: metrics
                    sort:
                      - column: value
                        sortOrder: DESCENDING
                    filter:
                      - column: metric
                        function: EQUALS_TO
                        args:
                          - "kogito_process_instance_duration_seconds_sum"
                    group:
                      - columnGroup:
                          source: labels
                        groupFunctions:
                          - source: labels
                          - source: value
----

.Workflow Metrics Dashboard
image::integrations/dashbuilder-workflows-metrics-dashboard.png[]

> If you are using Prometheus, we can use PROMQL with Prometheus REST API and transform the result to the JSON format supported by Dashbuilder to build dashboards. For further information about Dashbuilder and Prometheus check the article https://blog.kie.org/2022/07/creating-prometheus-dashboards-using-dashbuilder.html[Creating Prometheus Dashboards with Dashbuilder].

Reviewer 3: Do we support other metrics api different than Prometheus?

Author: AFAIK we only support metrics in Prometheus format. What I meant is that you can build dashboards using the output from `/q/metrics`  - without having to use Prometheus

Reviewer 3: So, instead, If you are using, what about something like, if the Prometheus endpoint or metrics are available..

== Using Data Index

> Data index is a service available during development mode, containing all data about the execution of workflow steps. By default, the data index is available at `http://localhost:8180`, and it uses GraphQL, so Dashbuilder can connect to it using its REST API and transform the result to the supported format.

Author: do you know a good official reference to be used here @ricardozanini ?

                    {"id": "Workflow Name", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "State", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "Start", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "End", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "Business Key", "type": "label"},
                    {"id": "Error", "type": "label"}
                ],    
                "values" : $.data.ProcessInstances.[ processId, processName, state, start, end, businessKey ? businessKey : "", error ? error.message : ""]
            }      
pages:
    - components:
        - settings:
            type: BARCHART
            lookup:
                uuid: workflows
                group:
                    - columnGroup: 
                        source: State
                      functions:
                          - source: State
                          - source: State
                            function: COUNT
        - settings:
            lookup:
                uuid: workflows
----

The YML above results in the following dashboard:

.Dashboard with data from Data Index
image::integrations/data-index-workflow-list-report.png[]

> For more examples check link:{dashbuilder_url}[Dashbuilder Website].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more examples check link:{dashbuilder_url}[Dashbuilder Website].

include::../../pages/_common-content/report-issue.adoc[]
```
